Mote Marine Laboratory – TagLab Orthomosaic/Orthoprojection segmentation protocol

By: Ian Combs
Last updated: 7/25/2022

1. Open TagLab
2. Go to Project > Add New Map	
a. Name the map as follows YYYY_MM_DD_Site
b. Navigate to the folder where the orthomosaic/orthoprojection is located
c. Enter the Acquisition Date 
d. Press OK.
3. Once map is loaded, select the measure tool and input scale by selecting the center points of each scale bar
a. Insert the proper size (500mm)
b. Select “Set new pixel size”
c. Select “Ok”
d. Save the file by navigating to File > Save Project
Note: It is usually helpful to measure a few more scale bars using the measure tool to ensure your scaling worked
4.  Go to Project > Labels Dictionary Editor
a. Using “New” or “Load” select the proper dictionary for your project (in most cases, this will be the “Mote Dictionary” or simply “Mote”
5. Go to Project > Set Working Area
a. Select the left most button that looks like a dotted square with a cursor
b. Draw a square that will be your working area
i. Make sure this encompasses the entirety of the outplant area, if this is impossible due to irregular outplanting shapes, you may need to work in batches
c. Select “Set”
6. On the tool bar, select the grid
a. Enter grid settings so you have roughly 1m x 1m boxes within your grid
i. This will change depending on the size and shape of your outplant and working area.
7. Begin segmenting
a. TagLab comes equipped with multiple tools to aid in segmentation
b. The decision hierarchy for tool selection should be:
i. Positive and negative clicks tool (3)
ii. 4-clicks tool (2)
iii. Free Hand Tool	(4)
8. Once a coral has been segmented, refine as needed using the Refine Border function (R), the Edit Border Tool (6) or the Cut Tool (7)
9. Once you are confident with the selection, press space to finalize the selection
10. Double click the segmented coral, then double click to assign the Class
Note: this is usually to species but can be modified depending on the objectives 
11. Once segmentation is completed, export your data
a. Navigate to File > Export > Export Annotations as Data Table
b. Name the file appropriately and save it in the appropriate, project-specific folder

